hi alan stratton from as wood turns my
brother just came back from Sedona
Arizona
he got enamored by kaleidoscopes that he
saw there now I've had a couple of
kaleidoscope kits on hand for a long
time that I hadn't gotten around to it
so here they are finally got around to
it
these are mini kaleidoscope I'd love to
have you see inside but apertures a
little bit small
hold them up and you twist them and see
the colors change beautiful patterns
fascinating to watch let's make a mini
kaleidoscope the instructions for this
mini kaleidoscope kit specify a 2-inch
square plank that is two and three
eighths inches long actually anything
over about one inch square would do I'm
comfortable with my kaleidoscope
finishing out at about 1 and 1/2 inches
in diameter i code up some walnut and a
duck for these blanks with the blank
ready the first step is to drill the
center hole with a thirteen sixteenths
inch Forstner bit Y thirteen sixteenths
maybe to sell more bits I drilled mine
on the lathe but a small scrap of wood
behind the blank to avoid drilling into
my Chuck when the bit broke through the
other end then trim the plank to two and
one quarter inches in length and mount
to a pen mantel with special mini
kaleidoscope bushings I have a set of
bushings but if I had to do it all over
again I turn mine from scrap wood no
need for these unless you're making a
lot of mini kaleidoscopes the mini
kaleidoscope is shorter than a standard
pen so a spacer is required to fill the
slight space on that mandrel please make
your own wood spacer best while you make
your bushings with such a short piece of
wood there's not a lot of room for
decoration
on this walnut I'll put a bead on each
end it's time for a little bead practice
anyway the pinoke will be planed to let
the wood speak for itself this project
is probably an excellent candidate for a
multi would glue up other than the beads
I'm aiming for an egg shape with the
large end being opposite the eyepiece my
personal preference
then they'll sand up through 400 grit
and finish with beeswax and mineral oil
I chose this finish over shellac because
it will be handled a lot and I can
easily renew the finish the challenge is
in this simply the instructions are
fairly detailed so I tried my best to
actually read and follow them first are
the mirrors these are front surface
mirrors they are small and hard to hold
I did better with my second set so
that's the one I'm joined I'm using the
tube as a holder to assemble the mirrors
then sliding them out a little to grab a
little bit of tape around the idea is to
not let them rattle inside the metal
tube then I blackened the cut ends of
the glass for the instructions next the
eyepiece the compact side of the lens
goes into the eyepiece then on such a
small piece which is the convex side
then a retaining ring to hold the lens
in place on my two kits the retaining
ring was too small
I had to stretch it open before
inserting it end for it to function
properly then the little gems go into
the other end the instructions say to
not overfill my first kaleidoscope is a
bit twofold the gems do not move as much
finally insert the end pieces into the
turning end screw it all together not
too difficult actually but here's my
biggest tip don't do this assembly in
the shop it's impossible to eliminate
all the dust I'll be taking mine apart
again
to give them a good cleaning maybe I can
find a class ten cleanroom voila
now I have a couple of mini
kaleidoscopes they really are simple and
easy project it takes more time to get
the kits and wood than to actually turn
the body the two inch blank is overkill
unless you really want a fat
kaleidoscope please click the like
button on this video and subscribe to my
website and YouTube channel
always wear your face shield until next
time this is alan stratton from as wood
turns